Perfectly with Nicholas Barker.
And I apparently miss... I said Harry Ransom's fondness for LDS.
And you said not fondness.
Yes.
He had a very great respect for him as a finder of books.
A very considerable understanding of him as a human being.
And a very shrewd assessment of what he had to offer Texas.
But fondness, no.
You should talk to the present director.
I have.
Tom Staley?
Tom Staley.
I've been.
I said four days ago.
And he gave a speech at the RBMS.
I have a copy of this.
I've already got a copy of it.
the tenor of the correspondence between Ransom and ODS.
But it wasn't exactly fondness.
It was a very well-knowledged, an acknowledgement on both sides of a very significant common interest.
Off the record, I asked to see, I asked Hanselian if I could see the files, the Feldman files, and he...
grant me that access.
Does that surprise you?
Not very much, no.
I mean, I'm not sure that I would give anybody access to the files.
I don't think I could give anybody access to the files of our recent correspondence.
He said basically the same thing.
He said, don't confuse
correspondence with with the materials that are here at the hrc he said they're two entirely different things and he said i really don't think that i can do that that seems to be quite proper and uh i'm not reading anything into it but uh there was a unique relationship between texas yeah and i'm trying to establish that in print and apparently it hasn't been done there has been a scurrilous are you familiar with the charles hamilton attack uh the book
Hamilton's an unusual fellow, I'm so sure you know.
I've interviewed him, by the way.
In 1981, he alleged, in a book he wrote titled Auction Madness, and he said point blank in there that Feldman and Ransom built the University of Texas at millions of dollars.
And he said the way they did it, it was really, if either of these men were alive, they would have an ironclad
libel suits against Hamilton.
But, of course, they were both dead.
You can't bring dead people, can't sue for libel.
Well, to make a long story short, I called Hamilton, I interviewed him, and I said, you made a very serious charge here.
I wonder if you can document this for me.
What do you base this on?
Can you give me a case?
What he said is that Feldman would bid the price up enormously.
He'd buy something for a cheap price and sell it to Texas for an enormous price, and that these two guys split the money.
This is what he said in this article.
I said, do you have any evidence for this?
I mean, this is quite a charge.
The short of it is he has no evidence for it.
He said his source for that was a woman who used to work for Feldman who he would not identify.
But she told him this, and I said, well, did she have an axe to grind?
She said, I don't have to record all this.
study is about motivation.
Well, I mean, Ransom would buy books from anywhere, and he had other people besides Feldman who wrote it here.
Very much so.
The late Mr. Ritter was saying books to Texas in quantity long before LDF came on the scene.
There were many other booksellers who worked with Ransom.
So, did you know Ransom at all?
I've been in the same room with him a couple of times.
Do you think he was knowledgeable?
Was he a knowledgeable book man?
Do you think he knew what he was buying?
Or was he really on a mission to buy as much as he could, as quickly as he could?
That's a rather delicate way.
No, I mean, obviously he was an administrator, first and foremost.
He couldn't have done what he did if he hadn't devoted most of his waking hours to making this extraordinary institution grow to what it became.
That he knew very well exactly what he was buying is beyond doubt.
If you were to ask him,
if he had recently bought this, that, or the other small book, I mean, I wouldn't have been able to take it.
It also seems, it also has been alleged on the BBC and any number of other places that he bought a lot of worthless stuff.
Well, worthless, of course, is a value judgment, and it's not the kind of verdict that most librarians would like to make, because
what is worth this today may be invaluable tomorrow, and vice versa.
And if you make the decision, also, to collect the manuscripts, the archival material of living people, well, obviously you're going to make a mistake.
You are, yes, absolutely.
Absolutely.
I mean, time hasn't had a chance to work its magic.
No, exactly.
And I mean, but remember that the HRC bought a great deal more besides modern manuscripts.
They happened to sort of collect them in overpowering strength, but all at the same time, they were buying old material as well.
I also, I have to say, when I was there, I've been now to operate most of the great libraries, and I was really impressed by what I saw.
I think it's an extraordinary
collection.
And while there may be some low spots, there are a lot of high spots, and Madame de Lucie, you know, I wanted to get the French evaluation of the French collection there.
And she said it's the best collection she knows outside of France.
She said it categorically.
She compared it to a Baltimore collection and said it was superior, as a matter of fact.
Well, I think that's right, because the Bodmer collection is now, has quite a lot of books been removed from the Bodmer collection.
I think that to compare the three institutions would only be possible for a certain class of French material, mainly the literary manuscripts of the last hundred years, because Texas is holding the literary manuscripts
We are focusing, we are confining our comments obviously to the last, I don't even know if it's the last hundred years so much, but it's the 20th century.
But anyway, that's not the point.
You told me when we spoke in November that those who criticize Texas
And I've heard this from Roger Stoddard, and I've heard this from Bob Nightkirk and Tom Tanzel of the book.
You've all basically used the same words, sour grapes.
Yes, yes.
I mean, most people would love to be given a blank check to find anything with.
So you think you would say, not think, but you would say that what they did down there was not necessarily any responsible
or was it an expression of institutional bibliolania, shall we say?
That's just a question.
It's not a phrase I'm asking any user or proof or anything.
Just a comment on it.
Yes, well.
I mean, everybody has their own taste.
We are nothing but the expression of the collective taste of the country that we live in and the people who we are to do the jobs that we want done.
The selection that we make won't satisfy everybody.
It may satisfy nobody.
All we hope is that it doesn't greatly offend
Very important point.
I think that's enough on Texas.
I did talk to Warren Roberts, by the way.
Oh, yeah.
The one mystery man I can't seem to locate is Deckard Turfman.
He's disappeared off the map.
He really has.
Nobody at the university even knows where he's gone.
Has his phone number.
He's in Austin.
He shows up at wrestling matches, they say.
I have his address.
I was even tempted to drive over there and knock on the door, but that's not the way I like to play.
No.
That's ambush journalism, and I'm not into that.
Couldn't you... Oh, I can write him.
And I really want him to comment, because he did do some very good things.
I mean, the Ford Skyler collection alone is...
in a significant position.
Yes, though in a sense, I mean, I think he would say that his main contribution was to remove massive acquisitions from being the sole residential institution into a position where it was
regarded as another factor alongside conservation of what they had.
He coined the phrase, have you ever seen his HRC notes?
He put out these little telegrams, and he sent them to people.
I would say in a set of them.
And in one, he coined the phrase, he coined the phrase, let's not continue with the ransom syndrome, which is what you just described.
Yes.
Which is buying, not on block, not just on block, on block, but
Everything.
Casting a wide net, shall we say.
Let's focus.
Let's use a laser beam to make it a little more precise.
And I think that embarrasses them a little bit, the fact that he has outspoken about one of his predecessors.
By the way, Carlton Lake served very briefly as interim director.
Yes, I know.
That was when he took such a very great dislike to this country.
Now, can you give me a little background on this?
Well, it was... If you don't mind, I'll confront him on it, by the way.
That's all in the public record.
He... And Decker Turner was also involved.
They had intended to try and... The fund was launched to try and rescue the house, Charleston House in Sussex, where Clive Bell and a number of other people from Bloomsbury
Duke group had lived and worked in the 30s and had been sort of decorated with wall paintings by Vanessa Bell and people like that.
And Texas were going to bid on these things.
And then they say they were alerted to the fact that all the documents had been microfilmed by the owners before consigning them for sale.
And so they did a sudden volt fast and decided not to bid on anything in the sale on the grounds that it was, as it were, contaminated by the fact that copies of it existed.
And they then launched a violent attack on the British for being dishonest in not...
Not disclosing this information?
No, for not disclosing the information before the sale.
But I really don't see... That's a non-issue.
They just don't bid on the stuff.
Well, they did.
But from then on, they had this policy of...
trying to control.
What they want to do is to try and control any use that's made of any material that they own.
You can't get photocopies out of them.
Can you comment on this for me, by the way?
I'd like a statement on this.
What do you think?
How do you react to this policy?
Well, I think it's indefensible.
The libraries, great libraries exist to make their collections,
available to people.
To promote the furtherance of scholarship.
Yes.
I mean, I think that one has to qualify what they say by saying that what they object to is people sending orders for photographs and photocopies from a distance and never going to see the originals.
Well, I have a certain amount of sympathy with this, although, obviously, if you live in...
or Melbourne or... Or Worcester, Massachusetts.
Worcester, Massachusetts, which is far enough away.
You have to reckon with the fact that there will be people who want to use this material and have at least some sight of it, who, for one reason or another, simply can't get you.
Though they may deprive themselves
of information they ought to have by trying to work from photographs do you think that's a valid point i i mean do you think that it can be i mean i think microfilm can be just as just as useful well it can but i mean there is a celebrated story of the man who tried to edit gerald manly hopkins's poems which were substantially corrected and worked over by robert bridges and because they had reasonably similar handwriting
he made a number of deductions about them based on certain assumptions about their handwriting.
And he discovered that if he'd seen the original instead of working from photographs, he would have found that Bridges used black ink and Hopkins used blue ink all the other way around.
And that he got the difference between their hands all wrong.
That's significant.
Which is obviously a significant and important fact.
He ought to have seen the original.
And so, I mean, there are good reasons why one should see the original.
How long ago was this, by the way?
That's fascinating.
I don't know.
Sometime in the last 30 years.
But to make it to ban... To make it hard and fast.
...material.
To tell the son of Robert Graves that he can't get...
to tell Michael Holwright that if he wants to do his biography, he has to spend the whole time there, doing correspondence, stretching everything.
Yes, but I mean, I'm not suggesting that some people are more deserving than others.
It's a question of policy.
Either you do let people have photographs of things, and we do let people have photographs of things, or you don't, or they don't.
Are they alone, do you think, in this policy?
Yes, to the best of my knowledge.
I mean, people may have difficulties.
I suppose there may be other places who have decreed that certain archives are under embargo for use by a particular student or by themselves, and there could be cases of that.
Why do you think they do this?
You think they just want people to come to Texas?
They want that meeting?
Well, it's a little difficult to say.
I'm trying to figure this one out myself.
I think that they do want people to come to Texas.
But perhaps even more important, they want to... They want respect?
They want respect from them.
They want to make sure, I think, on the bottom line,
that the goods mainly keep their scholarly value.
And they've probably been told, but I don't believe it's necessarily true myself, that a book, once a book's been copied, whether it's been... Or manuscript.
Or manuscript's been copied, whether it's been just simply transcribed or reproduced in fact civilly, it is devalued.
I don't actually see this myself, and see not much evidence in the sale room,
people pay less money for important letters.
I collect Walker Percy, for instance.
I just think he's a wonderful writer.
And I have a few very interesting letters that he wrote very early, when the letterhead was still M.D., crossed out.
And he was discussing Kierkegaard, who he quotes in the epigraph of the movie course.
It's a very interesting letter.
And I had somebody want a copy of it, and I
copied it and sent it.
And then I was later told by a dealer that I didn't previously, you know.
And I said, why?
What difference does it make?
This guy was a psychiatrist and was, you know, was interested.
And I said, it seems to me if he closed this letter, it makes my letter all the more valuable, I would think.
Although value was not my motive for having it.
But mainly the guy wanted it and he thought it was an extraordinary letter.
And he wanted a copy of it, I copied it, but... But that's when I heard, you know, what difference does it make?
You know, I own the original, that's what it sounds.
So when I... It just seemed like a meaningless... I mean, I quite agree with you.
But they do that there, and I have the explanation from Tom Staley, I won't try to paraphrase it, because I can't, but it's essentially what you... I mean, they have a rationalization for it.
It exists as a unique... Well, anyway.
But so Texas is one of my chapters.
And I think it's a very interesting chapter.
And it's pretty well put together, by the way.
I think I have the information.
You gave me a couple of quotes.
I will use that indefensible word, if that's all right with you.
You don't mind?
Yes, yes.
Because I think that I want to balance the... Yes, but I don't mind you saying that it's indefensible.
Okay.
You know, we're talking on tape, but I just want you to know that I would like to use that.
Yes.
Another chapter, which I think is my...
my really great chapter is the Haven O'Moore Garden Sale.
If you'd like to be brought up to date on that, if you're interested, I've really uncovered a lot of very fascinating information on that.
I'll shut off a bit.
I am particularly interested, and let's talk about, this is the British Library, and this is a national institution dedicated to the
gathering and preservation of precious documents.
Well, any document.
Any document.
I mean, again, precious.
I'm also interested in the role that the private and individual collector has played toward the preservation of such things.
And I walk into the reading room, and the first case I see is English literature number one, and of the nine items in there,
Three or four are cotton, and a number of others are holly.
And I think that we're talking here about two collectors who made a significant impact.
For instance, I start there with an opening.
What does the British Library owe to private collectors?
Let's throw that out as a general question.
Does the British Library owe to individual collectors?
Well, obviously, we're immensely the richer.
for a large number of private collectors over the years, bequeathing or giving us collections of books, as well as individual books.
And we like to think that people will still want to go on doing that.
We don't automatically have a copy of everything in the world.
It's not that long time.
Do you think that there are objects
I see Beowulf.
Would we have Beowulf if it weren't for cotton?
Presumably not, no.
Indeed, a good deal of early English literature comes from the cotton tract.
I understand that Colin Tate is writing something on cotton.
Are there... We're talking about cotton.
Yes.
He's a very interesting figure for me.
A useful little biography of him was published the other day.
Just published?
I mean like within the last six months?
Oh no, three years ago I'd say.
You might find it useful.
I mean the bibliophilic part of him was sort of summed up and I don't know if you've come across it but a book that some colleagues of mine and I put together called Treasures of the British Library
Was that published by Abrams last year?
It was, yes.
It's wonderful.
Yes.
I quoted from it in my proposal to my publisher.
It has sort of handy reaching down on the collections that have gone into this library.
I am interested in... Is there much known about Cotton, the individual?
He is said to be quite an idiosyncratic guy.
Well, I mean, I think that most of the...
Most of his individual characteristics were summed up in what we wrote then.
I mean, he had a very strong sense of the importance of preserving relics of the past, which was unusual at the time.
I look at the items of his that you have out there.
They're also strikingly beautiful.
Well, some of them are, yes.
Not by any means all of them.
Some of them, certainly.
I mean, do you think he was a collector in the modern sense?
No, certainly not.
I mean, as I think we tried to make clear in the book, what he was, was a man with passionate belief and insisting for preserving the documentary records of the past.
Rather for their evidential value from
sort of political, social, and religious grounds.
He saw that the preservation of the documents was a kind of defense against those who might attack the church and state, as he understood.
He came... I thought he was a lot closer to the dissolution of the monasteries than he actually was, so there was quite a bit of discussion between them.
Yes.
I mean, he wasn't born until 1573 or so.
So that's 40 or so years.
So it was 40 years afterwards, and he was, in many cases, the people from whom he got things were people who had rescued them from the dissolution of the monastery.
So there were people committed to the rescue.
Oh, yes.
We know the names of
half a dozen people who evidently made an effort to preserve material.
Is there any grasp on what was lost?
I mean, do you think that there were lost werewolves, shall we say?
Well, probably.
I mean, werewolves might have gone missing at any point in any of the previous 500 years because Anglo-Saxon had ceased to be a
live language very soon after the norman conquest and so the survival of manuscripts of any sort dating from that time was due to not to any more than the fact that people had no strong motive to destroy them but if they happened to fall off the back of a lorry nobody would
talk with Lori to give back and pick them up.
I went to Mr. Scheide's library in Princeton, by the way, which is quite an extraordinary year, by the library, and I spent a dazzling three hours in his company.
He would take out, and we started with what he called Unhazard, the 42-line Bible.
And then he took out
his, what he said, is the only Anglo-Saxon text in North America.
That's right, yes.
And I think the exportation of that, did that occasion the passage of some legislation here?
No, not as such.
But that kind of slipped through the cracks, didn't it?
I mean, that should not have left Great Britain.
No, it shouldn't.
It shouldn't.
It was very sad that it did.
And Bert and I was in a private...
Well, no doubt in admirable hands.
But it's sad to think that it was wonderful.
To go back to Texas, because this brings Texas to mind, they claim a number of people down there, the woman, for instance, I can't think of her name, she has custody of me.
She's a nice woman.
She wrote the book Doubly Gifted, as a matter of fact.
But she's the one who said, you know, that the British passed the legislation prohibiting the exportation of certain things, largely as, this is what they think down there, as a response to the Texas stuff.
I mean, the legislation came in in the first decade of this century.
So that's not true.
Yeah.
I mean, it's... They'd like to think... The great crisis was the...
the proposed export of the picture of Queen Christina by Holbein, which caused a great sensation about 1905 or 1907.
And there have been no more modifications to it as a response to this Texas stuff?
No, certainly not.
The basic legislation is in place, and that came in.
85 years or so ago.
Yes, I mean, the only things that get altered as money goes up is that there are certain parts of the legislation which relate to the value of the item being exported, and these levels get raised from time to time, but that's many a factor about money, not about the system.
I will be doing
Paying some attention to the informant, by the way.
I'll be going out to Bloomington.
I am looking into a number of individuals I've interviewed.
Leonard Baskin, the artist.
It's quite a very interesting collection.
The magician, Ricky Jade.
I'm hoping to... I'm trying to set up something with Larry Merchery, who's a political dealer.
Interesting people who... You can see Larry Powell, of course.
Larry Powell.
He's the greatest bookman in America today.
Who is he?
I don't know.
He was the librarian of UCLA for its great and crucial period of growth.
And the last survivor of the...
the great intellectual renaissance in Southern California.
Larry Powell.
Does he live in L.A.?
No, he lives in Tucson.
Okay, so now you have to go to Tucson.
Everything you told me to do, by the way, in November, I have done.
No, I can't say.
I kept the mental nature of it, even.
I hope I was helpful.
I went to Texas.
I went to see Bill Shaggy.
Yes, yes, yes.
And I'm presuming you've been to the Pierpont Morgan Library.
Oh, I did.
Several times.
That I didn't have to be told.
No.
No, I mean, Ian Fleming is a matter of particular interest because, as you may know, I'm the editor of the Book Collector.
I have every copy of that, by the way.
Do you?
Yes.
I just succeeded putting together a full one.
Well done.
It did not come...
inexpensively.
No, no, I'm afraid not, but they come cheaper if you put it together yourself than if you... Well, I am now a subscriber.
Good.
But anyway, you know, Ian Fleming was the man who, as it were, well, he was the owner from whom I had to take the book collector over because he died very suddenly in 1964.
And...
Something had to be done to keep the book collector going.
And I well remember going and seeing Mrs. Fleming and trying to help her deal with the problems of his library, which she never expected to get started with porn.
That's a library that should perhaps have stayed in Great Britain.
Um, no.
Hardly.
I mean... It's nothing that can't be replicated.
Ninety percent of it is here, for example.
But as a collection, it's... But as a collection, it's a very remarkable one.
But it's not like Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, which are part of the...
intellectual structure of the country, because Ian Fleming's collection was completely cosmopolitan.
It came from all over the world.
That was collected from all over the world.
And so one couldn't claim the same sort of sense of belonging that Anglo-Saxon manuscripts did.
Or modern English literary manuscripts, if it comes to that.
Now, I've read the biography of Fleming, which could have been better done, I think.
Yes, I think you're right there.
I just thought about it an aside.
It didn't tell me nearly as much as I thought... Well, it didn't make it... I mean, the trouble was that it's not the biography of Ian Fleming as we knew him at all.
It's the biography of the author of the Bond stories.
Well, obviously, to 99 people out of 100, Ian Fleming and the author of the Bond stories are the same person.
But the other...
one in a hundred who remembers him as many other things besides writing this very short period of his life when he was writing these immensely successful books.
There's a great deal more to him.
I think I've learned more about Fleming out of the book collector, shall I say.
But there was a question.
The one thing this fellow does suggest is that
Fleming's collection really was the creation of Percy Muir, and that he totally lost interest in it when he was trying to sell it.
Oh, no, that's nonsense.
But that's the suggestion in that book, and I wonder if you could set the record straight on that.
No, it's absolute nonsense.
I mean, Fleming and Muir had been friends for many years, and before the collection was started, I mean, the collection grew out of the friendship, not the other way around.
And... That's important, I think.
Yes.
And it certainly kept both of them occupied in different senses during the war.
I mean, it's true that during the war, Percy had very little else to do and found it a welcome occupation to go look for books for Fleming.
And Fleming, who was up for his years in...
animal to intelligence, finding a pleasant relief from the stresses of the war to take half an hour off to talk to Percy about his book collection.
And certainly after the war, it was very much a shared thing.
And then, of course, when Ian died so suddenly, it fell on Percy to arrange his sales.
The suggestion in the book is that he had been looking for a buyer.
all along Fleming had been, and that maybe this was his hedge, and that he had lost interest in the collection, too.
I mean, being the author of James Bond in the last, well, really, I suppose, only six years of his life, I mean, Casino Royale came out in 56, I think, but it wasn't for another couple of years that really the whole thing
shot off.
I mean, as he said to me, it was like being lashed to a balloon that was gaining helium.
His sense that the whole thing had gone beyond his control was perhaps the most striking thing about it.
I just don't think he had time to think about it.
And, well, he acquired another life, another persona.
Yes, he did.
Not one of his own choosing.
And not that I'm asking you to refute points in the book, but it's just that they do come to mind, and that I didn't even expect to talk about Fleming here, but I think a couple of quotes from you are really worthwhile.
He also suggests that Fleming was obsessed with respect as a literary man for the quality of his writing, and not just the creator of the spot stories.
That's right.
I found this a very flawed biography.
I was really very disappointed in it.
I spent $25 for it.
I think I overpaid.
I think so.
I mean, no, I mean, my own recollections of him are of him sort of amazed that people took this stuff seriously.
Really?
So that's totally off in your estimation?
I would say so.
I mean, I think he'd prefer...
in the sense that, I mean, you know, he always said, well, he's most proud of writing it.
He probably said the manual for Sunday Times Foreign Journalists, which he also wrote.
Okay.
I will be giving some very brief attention to T.J.
Weiss, of course.
It is interesting that Holbrook Jackson, in his Anatomy of Bibliomania, really doesn't pay much attention to the Cotter-Politik disclosure.
But it hadn't come out.
It hadn't come out?
No, no.
The Anatomy of Bibliomania came out before the inquiry.
I'll have to check it again.
Okay.
That would obviously explain it, but it seems to me that... I mean, I bring this up because...
you know, for all of this, why he's really made some significant contributions to book collecting.
Oh yes, very much so.
And Percy, you know, in one of those articles that he wrote, he said, I will not discuss, it is not my intention today to discuss the more nefarious disclosures regarding why I do want to talk about his contributions to taste and the collecting of books.
I thought it was the anatomy of... It's 51, I think, isn't it?
No, it's 1930... 1931.
Third edition revised, 1932.
Okay.
So it was well before the... They were about 37, I guess.
No, 34.
So they were published in July 34th.
Yes.
I have a first of that, by the way.
Well, see, I mean, the... Congratulations.
But I mean, you know, Hobbrook-Jackson... No, it was no... ...couldn't possibly have known about it.
Except that I am told that that was talked about for years and years.
Not true.
That people suspected it.
No, not true again.
Wise that there was a...
There were a certain number of people in the book trade who, with good reason, suspected that Wise was a crooked man, in some sense of the word.
But nobody had the faintest suspicion of what he had done until Dr. Impala came along.
That's the greatest, really, bibliographic
of the 20th century.
It really is.
It's quite extraordinary.
Beyond any doubt.
And you do both Carter and Paula?
Yes, indeed.
Could you tell me just a little bit?
Well, not really.
Because I've got about four books by Carter.
He really is kind of one of my subjects.
I would recommend you, I mean, the three people whom I bracket together in this
league, so to speak, are Carter, Pollard, and Tim Munday, whom you must have heard.
And if you turn to the pages of the booklet for that sad period from, I mean, Tim died, I think, on 26th of December 1974, and Graham
I forget, it was in 1976, but in the space of about 18 months, all three of them were gone.
And I wrote what I thought about all three of them in the book collector then.
If you turn to your book collector, you'll find the... I just, by the way, five days before I left, the quake came in.
Well, I mean, really, don't waste time asking me about them.
What you have to say is there.
Okay, good.
How about, what do you have to say about Wise, though, as a contributor?
Well... I mean, we have his libraries... Well, on the one hand, I mean, he was a very great collector of books, is certain.
He was also...
He was certainly not a clever man, he was a very energetic man, a very business-like man.
He got through a great deal of work in his life.
He didn't have any great sensibility for books.
When somebody said to him,
Well, in fact, A.W.
Pollard, A.W.
Pollard, who is in no relation, a very great figure in this library, when he was told that Weiss had been convicted of forgery.
Not convicted.
Well, I mean, the book had come out.
That defamed him, certainly.
Which accused him of forgery.
He said, it can't be true, he hasn't got the intelligence.
He wasn't very clever but he had very very very shrewd market sense.
He basically amassed his collection on the profits of buying simultaneously for American collectors like Wren and many others and selling them dear
and using the profits to buy his presentations.
Didn't he actually get one... Was it Browning?
No.
Somebody to actually inscribe one of his... Well, both Swinburne and William Morris put their signatures on books at his request.
And... Well, I don't think it's very amazing.
I mean, authors aren't by nature very...
curious of things.
And you also have to remember that... But it gives it a provenance.
Well, obviously that was the intention.
And I mean, people were a lot less fussy about copyright a hundred years ago than they are now.
I mean... Heresy was de rigueur, so to speak.
Not unknown, certainly.
And I mean, for example,
Somebody, I think, in Aberdeen, somewhere in this country, read a piece of Ruskin, which he picked up in a provincial newspaper in New England somewhere.
He'd been in America and read this piece of Ruskin.
He thought it would be very, very good, and so he came back and reprinted it.
Now, in doing so, of course,
breached Ruskin's copyright.
But I'm sure he had no intention of doing so.
It was a genuine tribute to Ruskin, a desire to see that Ruskin's words were better known.
And so that this, I won't say this excuses what Carter and Pollard did at all, but it does explain why, where it explains, for example,
why people weren't more suspicious.
He also managed to get some of these publications here into the British Library.
Yes, he gave a good number.
Which gave them a bibliographic basis, I guess.
Yes, yes.
Some bibliographic authority, I guess.
Yes, I think that's absolutely true.
And that was not, I mean, you said,
One of your predecessors here said that he wasn't a very clever man.
I think that was quite clever.
And then he has since been found to have torn pages out of British Library books, which is inexcusable, of course.
Yes, that's why we were all particularly worried about this man tonight.
But having said all this, how do you judge his collection, which you continue to do?
Well, it was, as Henry said, it was respectable in the 16th and 17th century.
very great in the 18th century, and unequalled and unequalable in the 19th century.
So he did have some taste, certainly.
Well, no, I don't think he had any taste at all, but he did set himself to buy, to run down and put together all the books by all the famous authors in English literature that he lay hands on.
Tell me just, and I know my time is running out, tell me just a little bit more about this fellow, Larry Powell, who you recommend, I see.
Well, I mean, anybody will tell you.
He's the greatest living collection builder.
Institutionally.
Institutionally, yes.
He's an author himself.
He's in his 80s now.
And I revere and admire him as...
as one of those sort of legendary figures of American... You say the greatest, you mean the greatest American or the greatest, you just throw that out as a phrase.
Well, I mean, America has been a remarkable place over the last 50 years.
I mean, it's been a great period of the growth of institutional collecting in the world.
More books
have moved from their previous homes to America than to any other place in the world.
And Larry Powell was one of the greatest movers in that movement.
Mainly, his contribution was to UCLA, he said.
Yes.
I mean, Los Angeles was his base, but Occidental College, now UA.
He's had other places besides UCLA.
Well, UCLA Library, which after all has some seven million books in it.
It's one of the great libraries.
I'm making a trick up that way, as a matter of fact.
It's a monument to him.
David Redden at Sotheby's said to me at one point that he believes we are embarking in a new golden age of book collecting.
Would you agree with that?
With respect to the fact that if you have the money, you can put together a world-class collection.
I threw this to Ed Wolfe.
He said, well, regardless of how much money do you have, he said, do you think you could get a full run of Shakespeare's Quartos?
He said, we can't even get a full run of the Pennsylvania Gazette here at the Library Company.
He said, I disagree with that, in short.
Well, I don't know.
I think I'd fool somewhere between the two.
I mean...
As things stand in the world today, no Lord knows how long it will last.
Individuals are richer than institutions.
There's been a swing against publicly funded bodies.
And rich men are very much richer than they used to be pro rata.
20 years ago.
So that the balance of power has switched away from the institutions to the private collectors.
What does this mean for the institution?
Bad news.
Very bad news.
We don't expect to buy very much.
We can't.
Of course, the tax structure, certainly in the United States, they've made it really
There's no angle.
There's no incentive now for the collector to, there's no tax incentive anymore.
You can't write it off the way you used to.
They used to, yes, indeed.
So therefore you sell.
Yes.
I mean, you can get some tax incentives still.
But not like the old days.
But not to the same extent that you used to.
And
I would imagine that an astute businessman who has, let us say, made an uncomfortable and unexpected and therefore unduly taxable profit in one year could still find it useful to
give away his book collection as a means of diminishing excess profit tax.
Okay.
I think I've probably run to the end of my time.
Well, I mean, I'd go on for another ten minutes.
Okay.
What title do you prefer using here?
I'm just called Head of Select Materials.
That's my official title.
And you've been here for a mere trifle of 40 years.
You are in an unusual situation where you edit the publication.
Yes.
And you really do speak for private book collectors.
Well, the book collector is a forum.
For the public, for the librarian, the private collector, and the bookseller to meet on equal terms.
That's what it's about.
So that it's not for, it's called the book collector, but it's directed equally at all three.
To book men and women.
Yes.
From all three, as it were, branches of the book world.
But my point is, where you say it's bad news for the institution, on the other hand, you still, I know you've told me that you're a book collector yourself.
I think what you would, in a perfect world, we see the collectors still having
Oh, yes.
Everything shouldn't go into an institution.
When I asked you about the flooding collection, I was kind of surprised.
I said, too bad it didn't stay.
It doesn't bother you at all.
It doesn't bother me at all.
And had it been bought en bloc by another collector, that would have worried me still less.
No.
Obviously, it seems to me that the greatest good is done to humanity by the largest number of books being available to it.
The only question is how they're best made available, some of them.
I mean, Bill Jackson, the very, very great librarian of the Houghton Library at Harbin, once sold the world's most perfect copy of Vaughan's Silex Scintillands, 1650, one or two, I think.
On the grounds that this was a book
too beautiful and too perfect for a public library to own it.
It ought to be in a private collector's collection where it would be protected from too much use.
Do you concur with that judgment?
You wouldn't have recommended selling it, I'll bet.
And they did sell it, I gather.
They did sell it.
Ironically, it's now returned with Bob Taylor's collection to Princeton.
So it's gone, ultimately, to an institutional collection.
I don't think you'll see Princeton put it out on the market any time soon.
I should be surprised.
Yes, I think nowadays people... I think a different principle comes into action, which is that people are much more
alert to and sensitive to and can derive more information from individual copies of books than they can, than they used to be.
I mean, in the day, in the old days, you'd say, I've got a copy of Silex, Sinterlands, full stop.
Nowadays, people would say that my copy
is interesting because it was the first copy that arrived in the USA, or my copy is interesting because it has a contemporary binding, or my copy is interesting because it was in the Zion College Library or something like that.
But going back to Jackson, using that as a justification, why just that book?
I think you could pick any number of exquisite things from the collections.
sell them on that basis.
It was the absolute mint affection of the condition.
Now, you see, I mean, he had a very valid point, which is that in a public library, it was a necessity of things, that there is a greater chance that people will come and use and finger and touch things.
It's happened this evening.
Yes, it's happened this evening.
That property, when it was in a private collection, in Grenville's collection, was, no doubt, in absolute mint condition.
Now,
150 years later, though lovingly cared for, it's been touched by too many people.
And you are mandated to allow, one would hope, responsible people to touch that.
Yes, I mean, in the case of the first failure of Shakespeare, 99% of people's requirements are met by the... The Norton fact simile, which I have, which is wonderful.
Exactly, which is
It's the ideal copy.
It is the ideal copy.
It's been reproduced to some of all copies of Shakespeare.
That really is a justification for having duplicate copies, isn't it?
Yes, yes, absolutely.
And going back to what you were saying about the difference between Jackson's time and our time, it is the fact that people now realize that there are no such things.
as duplicates, that every copy of every book has its own independent life, which distinguishes it from every other copy of that book.
Well, what will happen now to the Taylor Library at Princeton?
You think they will have to make that available to scholars?
I mean, no, I would guess that the Taylor Library at Princeton is going to be rather the Michael Peake's Library at Moreland College, Cambridge, that only people
with very, very strong credentials for seeing the books in it, are going to be allowed to touch them at all.
And the people who wander into Princeton and say, I want to read Keats's poems, 1817, are going to be directed to another copy of Keats's poems, 1817, not the Taylor copy.
As well they should be.
As well they should be, yes.
And what worries me about this evening's incident
is the evident breakdown in the system which we thought.
Something happened, yeah.
Well, something lapsed.
Something, something, something has slipped.
That's what we put right.
Things always slip and all the lapses.
Well, Harvard has just issued, I don't know if I had a chance to see it, the facsimiles of the Keats poems.
It's wonderful.
That, of the Houghton Managers.
Yeah.
Beautiful.
Helen Benley wrote a little book.
I'm wondering if that will serve the scholar, or will the scholar still need access?
I don't think Keats wrote in two different colorings, shall we say?
No, but I'm sure it will be useful to have facts similar to Keats's manuscripts, because anybody's manuscripts are fascinating.
I mean, every manifestation of a text is interesting, but obviously if
The author, where you can, if you can get inside the skin of the author, actually see the pen shaping the letters, see where it decided halfway through a word that this was not the right word, and this would be the right word, and you can see what
the word that first came to mind was, even though it was deleted halfway through the writing of it.
Well, try and read Emily, try and understand Emily Dickinson without reading Emily Dickinson's manuscripts.
Yes, yes, yes.
I mean, because she had her own punctuation, she had her own... Well, I mean, seeing an Emily Dickinson manuscript adds a whole new dimension to one's appreciation of her picture.
She's a different poet, I think.
I love him.
I think you're absolutely right, but one does get a very real feeling.
I mean, after all, there's been a lot of argument in recent times about deconstructionalism is about all this, that actually no poem has the author's intentions are immaterial, what counts is
what it means to you.
And this seems to me to be absurd.